Artifacts from completing Northwestern University Predict 410
=============================================================

    This course develops the foundations of predictive modeling by: introducing the
    conceptual foundations of regression and multivariate analysis; developing
    statistical modeling as a process that includes exploratory data analysis, model
    identification, and model validation; and discussing the difference between the
    uses of statistical models for statistical inference versus predictive modeling.
    The high level topics covered in the course include: exploratory data analysis,
    statistical graphics, linear regression, automated variable selection, principal
    components analysis, exploratory factor analysis, and cluster analysis.

I'm sharing artifacts from my completion of the course with the intent that
someone may benefit from the approach taken. I'm sharing everything that I think
is reasonable without treading on the publishers of reference texts, and the
academic institution. I'd ask that if you've come upon this repository and use
it for reference, please contact me and let me know what helped you.
Alternatively, if you've found this and believe I'm in violation for sharing the
material, please contact me first rather than issue a take-down.

I've deliberately included the data along with the source code so that the work
can be reproduced, however I've also omitted the course instruction as it is
likely to cause a claim from the institution. It is also likely that the course
will significantly change as time goes on, so the value of this reference is
limited. However, I've personally found references from decades prior while
working on this course, and felt that if I could benefit anyone I should share.

The overall caveat is that I'm just a student. Typically out of time, and under
duress to complete this course material. I don't posit that this is a correct
reference, rather, I know there are significant shortcomings. Read everything as
a skeptic, and think critically rather than directly re-use something that I
have done.

Northwestern's [Predictive Analytics](http://sps.northwestern.edu/program-
areas/graduate/predictive-analytics/) program was the first that I found to
provide full degree accreditation from a completely on-line program with
curriculum vectoring towards becoming a practitioner of Data Science. I'm
excited to participate in the program and hope that the university doesn't take
offense in me sharing this coursework.

I would like to see higher education adopt a more open form of education, much
like what we're seeing in the massively on-line open courses of late. I further
would like to see institutions choose to use libre/open technology in their
curriculum, as these tools are forms of expression that become unavailable to
students after separation with the institution. Where possible I've tried to use
or reproduce work in libre/open form, however time is always limited.

andrew.g.dunn@u.northwestern.edu